---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: "Finance Accounting - Cash Flow"
read: 5
secondary: others
date: 2021-05-07
---
### 1. Types of cash flow

The statement of cash flows is a report of the amount of cash collected and the amount of cash paid by a company during a period, a month, quarter, or year.

Statement of cash flows is to separate the cash flows into three categories: Operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities.

- Operating activities: are the things that you do every single day related to the actual operations of the business. It includes all the cash flow, in and out. When would you collect cash from operating activities? Walmart collects cash from its operating activities when it collects cash from selling items. A consulting company collects cash by providing consulting services to client and then collecting the cash from them. Those are cash inflows from operating activities. Examples of cash outflows from operating activities are cash paid out in wages, to vendors, to the landlord, along with all the other cash it must spend to keep the doors open and the business operating (such as utilities, taxes, interest). 

- Investing activities: means investing in the productive capacity of the business. So, cash outflows is mainly spent on capital investment to purchase assets (such as new buildings, new land new machines). Conversely, if the company sells a truck or a machine (or any other asset), the cash inflows is also shown here.

- Financing activities: borrowing money and paying back loans. I'm borrowing some money to buy assets. Those are cash inflows from financing activities. Cash outflows from financing activities: pay off the principal on loan, buy back its own stock, pay dividends to its shareholders.

### 2. Meaning of cash flow

- Operating activities: shows operating cash flow, indicating the health of a business. A company with a consistently healthy operating cash flow is probabily profitable, and doing a good job of turning its profits into cash. A healthy opearting cash flow means that it can finance more of its growth internally, without either borrowing or bringing in more outside investment

- Investing activities: shows how much cash the company has spent on investment in its future. Any successful business must make such investments.If the number is low relative to the size of the company, then it is not investing in the future growth. Note: a service company typically invests less in assets than a manufacturing company.

- Financing activities: indicate whether the company is a net borrower (borrowing more than it is paying off). It also shows whether you have been selling new shares to outside investors or buying back company stock

As Warren Buffett says, there is much less room for manipulation of the numbers on this cash flow statement than on the others. Less room does not mean "no room". For example, if a company is tring to show good cash flow in a particular quarter, it may delay paying vendors or employee bonuses until the next quarter. If the company delays over and over, vendor will stop providing goods and services and impact significantly on the business.


------------------
**References**

Karen Berman, Joe Knight with John Case, Financial Intelligence for Entrepreneurs What You Really Need to Know about the Numbers, Harvard Business School Press

Kay Stice, Jim Stice, Accounting Foundations, https://www.linkedin.com/learning/accounting-foundations-2018
