---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: "Probability - Part 7 "
read: 15
secondary: prob&stat
date: 2020-12-26
---

### 1. Sampling distribution

+ We can not pinpoint exact answer for population total/average/proportion of outcomes because our prediction will be based on sample results, and sample results will vary when we repeat sampling over and over again.

+ **Population parameter**: represent the true values for the population and can not often be found exactly. E.g: population total T, population average $\mu$, and population proportion p.

+ In order to find probabilities for population total/average/proportion, we take a sample and find sample total t, sample average $\bar{X}$, and sample proportion $\hat{p}$. These numbers that summarize samples are called **sample statistics**. We use them to estimate or predict numbers from population parameters.

+ Sample results vary from sample to sample, so sample statistics vary while population parameters stay the same.

+ Sampling distribution: To predict probability for population parameter, take all possible samples of the same size from population, finding sample statistics for each sample and making a probability distribution out of it. Each sample has their own sampling distributions with their own means and standard error (Standard error is the same as standard deviation but name changes when applied to a sample statistic)

*Example 1 (for sample total)*: A roller-coaster can hold a max of 30 passengers. How much weight the coaster can carry ? 

+ Select a random sample of 30 people, measure weight per person, then sum up the weight -> We get the sample total, t.

+ Repeat the process with another random sample of 30 people, record sample total, and then do it again and again. 

+ Then, put all the sample totals into a histogram. This histogram represents the sampling distribution of the sample total, t for total weights of passengers over all possible samples. 

*Example 2 (for sample average)*: Find average age ($\bar{X}$) of passengers on rollercoaster. 

+ Select a random sample of 30 people, measure weight per person, sum up the weight and divide by 30 -> We get the sample average $\bar{X}$

+ Repeat process with large number of samples (each sample has size 30)

+ Put all values of $\bar{X}$ into histogram, we have *sampling distribution of the sample mean*. 

*Example 3 (for sample proportion)*: Find the proportion of passengers on the rollercoaster who are women. 

+ Select a random sample of 30 people, take the total number of women in the sample and divide by 30. 

+ Repeat process over and over with large number of samples (each sample has size 30)

+ Put all values of $\hat{p}$ into histogram -> sampling distribution of sample proportion

### 2. The Central Limit Theorem (CLT)

+ Allow to measure the variability in sample results by taking only one sample. And we can find probabilities of each sample statistics based on one sample.

+ Result of CLT: 3 major sample statistics (sample total, sample average and sample proportion) each have sampling distribution approximate to normal distributions as long as the size of sample n is large enough. 

=> To find probabilities for sample statistics, all you need to know is average and standard error. 
