---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: "Probability - Part 1 "
read: 15
secondary: prob&stat
date: 2020-12-20
---

*During the holiday 2020, I had free time to read a book about Probability written by Deborah J. Rumsey. Besides, I read many other sources to have a deeper understanding about the probability. Series of probability shows main concepts I learnt from.* 

### 1. Understand probabilities

+Probabilities based on long-term percentages

Eg: chance of winning a lottery is 10%. This probability means that in the long term (over thousands of tickets), 10% of all lottery tickets purchased will win a price. ***It does not mean that if you buy 10 tickets, one of them will automatically win.***

+Limitation of probability: Suppose you know that 60% of the people in the community are Democrats, 30% are Republicans. If picking randomly 1 person from community, what is the chance the person is a Democrat? The chance is 60% but you can not say that the person is surely a Democrat because the chance is over 50%. Percentages just tell that the person is more likely to be a Democrat.

### 2. Approaches

**a. Classical approach**

-Use Math and counting rules to calculate exact probabilities in many cases when you can count possible outcomes and figure their individual probabilities by using Math. 

***Example***

+Roll 2 die: there are 6 possible outcomes for 1st die and have another 6 possible outcomes for 2nd die. So, there is: 6 x 6 = 36 possible outcomes for the pair.

+Probability of getting 2 dies with sum = 3 is 2/36 because only two of the outcomes result in a sum of three: 1-2 or 2-1. However, sum of 7 has probability = 6/36 because it has the most possible ways: 1-6, 2-5, 4-3, 5-2,and 6-1

**b. Find relative frequencies**

-In cases you can not come up with a math formula to figure a probability, the relative frequency approach is the best bet. The approach is based on collecting data and finding the % of time (*relative frequency*) that an event occurred.

***Example***

+Find the probability that the next person with red hat will come to party. We can estimate this probability by counting total number of guests and how many guests with red hat. If there are 27 of guests with red hat out of 100 guests, the relative frequency is 27/100.

=> Limitation of this approach is you can only estimate based on finite samples of data you collect and other conditions when you collect data. 

**c. Use simulations**

-Create data by setting up a certain scenario over and over many times and looking at % of times a certain outcome occurs. It sounds like the relative frequency approach but it is different in 3 ways: You create the data using a computer, do not collect in the real world. The amount of data is much larger. And because you use model, it has assumptions. 

***Example***

+Let computer plays out a game of chance for you. Assuming that you will have 1 dollar if a head comes up and deduct 1 dollar if tails comes up. Repeat the bet thousands of times and you can see the result.

**Please read** [Probability - Part 2](https://lytranp.github.io/notes/prob1)

-------------------------------------------------
**References**

Deborah Rumsey, Probability for Dummies
