---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: "Probability - Part 5 "
read: 15
secondary: prob&stat
date: 2020-12-24
---

### Probability model

Sometimes, it is necessary to move away from individual probability scenarios, and start to see situations in which probabilities follow a certain predictable pattern that you can use a probability model to describe.

A probability model gives you formulas to calculate probabilities, determine long-term average outcomes and amount of variability you can expect in the results from 1 random experiment to the next. 

A probability model is a mathematical model you use to fit a random process. Each random process must meet a different set of assumptions for each different model.

The main parts of a probability model: ***random variable*** and ***its probability distribution***

**a. Random variable**

Random variable is a variable whose value is determined by the outcome of a random procedure. Variable is random because we can not say what the observed value of the random variable is until we actually carry out the random procedure. 

Notation: 

+ X represents the random variable X

+ P(X) represents the probability of X

+ P(X = x) refers to the probability that the random variable X is equal to a particular value (x).

E.g: Roll 2 dice: there are 36 potential outcomes: {(1,1), (1,2), (1,3)....(6,4), (6,5), (6,6)}. Random variable X = the sum of the potential outcomes. P(X = 7) refers to the probability that the sum of 2 dices = 7. 

+ Discrete random variable

    + Finite number of possible values (E.g: total heads when flip coin 1,000 times)

    + Countably infinite number of possible values (E.g: the number of car accidents because you can not know an upper limit for this value.)

+ Continuous random variable: 

    + Continuous random variable is data come from an interval of possible outcomes. Example: the amount of rain (in inches) that falls in a randomly selected storm; the weight (in pounds) of a randomly selected student; m2 of a randomly selected three-bedroom house.

    + There are some ways of summarizing continuous data: using histograms, stem-and-leaf plots, and box plots. 

**b. Probability distribution**

Probability distribution is a table or an equation that links each outcome with its probability. Instead of using classical approach to calculate the probability of an event, we can use ***discrete probability distribution*** and ***continuous probability distribution*** to determine the probability of an event given that assumptions of distribution are met.

+ If a random variable is a discrete variable, its probability distribution is called: **Probability mass function (pmf)** (in another word, the function used to describe the probability distribution of a discrete random variable is called p.m.f) because it shows how much probability is given to each value of random variables. Discrete random variables have cumulative distribution function that take a fixed value for a certain interval, and then jump up at the next value.

=> With p.m.f, each possible value of the discrete random variable can be associated with a non-zero probability. Thus, p.m.f can always be presented in the tabular form.

+ If a random variable is a continuous variable, its probability distribution is called: **Probability density function** (p.d.f) because it does not actually assign probability, it assigns density, which means you find probabilities for intervals of X, not particular values of X when X is continuous. In another word, continuous random variables have no probability at any single point. Histogram and box plots can be quite useful in suggesting the shape of a probability distribution (3 possible shapes we should concern: symmetric, skewed left, or skewed right)

=> Continuous probability distribution can not be expressed in the tabular form. Instead, an equation of formula is used to describe p.d.f

**c. Cumulative probability distribution**

A cumulative probability refers to the probability that the value of a random variable falls within a specified range. 

**Please read** [Probability - Part 6](https://lytranp.github.io/notes/prob6)