---
layout: post
mathjax: true
title: "Java: Loop - Part 2"
read: 15
secondary: others
date: 2021-01-14
---
### Condition

- If-else statement: 
    
    You can embed a branch inside of an expression by using conditional operator. The conditional operator is a variant of if-else statement
  
  Using if-else statement:

    if (n1 > n2)

        max = n1; 

    else

        max = n2;

Using conditional operator:
    
    max = (n1 > n2) ? n1 : n2;

- Switch statement 

    - Always using *break* after each case. When encounting *break*, the loop ends immediately.

    - If there is no *default* and the value does not match with any case, then nothing happens.

### Loops
- *while* statement: The Boolean expression is checked before the loop body is executed. If Boolean expression is False, it is not executed.  

- *do-while* statement: The body of loop is executed first and the Boolean expression is checked after the loop body is executed => Do-while statement always executes the loop body at least once. 

- *For* loop: repeats the loop body a predetermined number of times. Nested loops: nest one loop statement inside another loop statement

- The *break* and *continue* statements

    - The *break*: finish the loop. The break statement ends a loop but does not end the program. *System.exit(0)* immediately ends the program. System is predefined Java class that is automatically provided by Java, and exit is a method in the class System. The method *exit* ends the program as soon as it is invoked. Traditionally, 0 is used to indicate a normal ending of the program.

    - The *continue*: skip current iteration of loop body and continue executing  next iteration.

### Equality check 

- When testing 2 values of primitive type, e.g, 2 numbers, we use == 

- When applying to objects, == has different meaning: it tests whether 2 strings refer to the same object. Since all strings are in the class String, are of type String, to test equality we use either *equals* or *equalsIgnoreCase*.